The AI-Education Problem: The Solution’s Right in Front of You
By Conrad Turner
Distinguished Visiting Professional, Waide Center for Applied Ethics, Fairfield University

image
The AI-Education Problem: The Solution’s Right in Front of You (revised 2 Jun 2023)

Artificial intelligence will have benefits, I’m told. But having seen lots of dictators and oligarchs use tech to do bad stuff and get away with it, I just want to run for the hills.

I also worry for university educators, who will have a tough time with AI’s effects on academic integrity and learning — just as they’re readying future leaders to deal with such big issues. The way ChatGPT upended writing assignments, for example, must still be a shock to their system. It won’t be the last.

Who will help them? Won’t private industry rescue traditional teaching models from AI?

Big Tech will be glad for the income. We can look forward to a forever duel of education algorithms, where nobody understands what the heck is going on, and pesky issues of ethics and trust are punted to the “cloud” for monitoring and enforcement.

But whenever tech infringes on education, that’s when we need to invest in our finest human qualities. Our enlightened self-interest and yearning for community. Our joy in problem-solving and team endeavors. To rally every soul in collective defense of authentic learning.

Because students have the solution — part of it, anyway: young adults are the untapped foot soldiers and brain trust against non-learning in the AI era.

Wait a minute, aren’t students the problem?

No. I have with my own eyes seen students step up to defend their universities’ quality and reputations by challenging cheating, improper collaboration, and plagiarism in all their forms. Through my work with Central Asian and Ukrainian universities, and during my own U.S. grad and undergrad experiences, I saw them make a difference. In some cases their roles were institutionalized.

How did they do it? They started by knowing what was actually going on in and out of classrooms. And hating it.

Then they took on countless responsibilities, surprising others and themselves with their maturity and impact.

They counseled their peers on the principles and practices of integrity. Some advised their administrations and professors on the (in)adequacy of incentives and control measures.

A few even volunteered for honor councils and adjudicated student infractions in accordance with honor codes they or their predecessors had crafted, amended, and ratified.

Critically, they had fun — were motivated with a sense of meaning and purpose — while doing it. And they learned. For some it was life-changing in the best of possible ways.

In fact, students defending integrity is nothing new. Do a quick online search: at some institutions, they’ve been doing it for decades, even well over a century.

Not all students, of course. Most are busy doing other things. And not equally or in unison. Some actively resist the responsibility that comes hand-in-hand with high-functioning classrooms. (Some professors do, too.)

But within every student collective you will find a core willing and able, in concert with enlightened and supportive faculty and administrators, to support your institution’s integrity. Gradually they will, in one way or another, help bring their peers and community into the present.

How might their role look? A few examples come to mind: frequent social media campaigns, workshops, publications and events with reminders of the principles, rules and measures of the institution’s honor system; grad students briefing incoming grad students; undergrads briefing and mentoring freshmen; international student associations briefing incoming students in their native languages….

And meaningful student representation on academic integrity policy committees.

That’s just for starters. Activities and structures will differ from one school and even department to another. But the objective will be the same: to work in concert with faculty and administrations preparing new generations with the habits and skills they’ll need to thrive and lead with integrity in our increasingly disintegral society.

In most cases those students will need mentoring. But this is key: mentors must not only be committed to the institution’s success but feel safe from the whims of a jittery academic bureaucracy. They and their mentees must be trusted to take on tough issues. Administrations must stand up for them. Universities have long resisted modernizing. AI won’t change that. Only enlightened leadership can.

This will also require deep thought about the purpose of modern education. Is it a digital paper-and-grade chase or way to develop learning skills? Writing one’s own thoughts using one’s own logic based on one’s own experience and research is training the brain to think. Did ChatGPT just make that technique obsolescent? Is the classroom now a place where kids learn to get by or beat the system using the latest AI tools that do the “thinking” for them?

Students will help you find the answer.

You say they already have a role in academic integrity at your college? That’s great. Is it enough? Change has sped past our ability to grasp it.

Some educators will say students aren’t mature enough for such responsibility. By what measure? Students can be articulate. Organized. Prudent. And yes, impassioned. Almost by definition they grasp new tech better than the rest of us. With defined roles and support from above they can work with you and their peers to bring lasting improvements that bring honor to the institution.

Aren’t they already overwhelmed with reading lists and chasing internships and careers while holding down work-study jobs? Aren’t we also too busy to deal with this now?

I’ll leave those questions with you to ponder… But consider this: what better education and credentials are there than the challenging work of strengthening integrity? What better way is there to manage the growing burden of enforcing honesty than to share responsibility for upholding integrity?

Your institution already has an honor code, you say, and the rules are required reading online and repeated in your syllabi? Good. But there are a thousand reasons why that alone has never worked. It’s time to move past legal cover and give life to those codes.

You see, the problem never was the students. Not alone.

Which brings me back to fears and risks. Maybe the biggest of them is that we’ll hear the question, “Why are we still recruiting/teaching/assigning/assessing/enforcing this way?” And we’ll need to respond.

Luckily, much of the hard work is done: we already know, broadly, how to build and defend authentic learning. The trick is in the implementation: integrity must be integrated bit-by-bit into every aspect of higher ed.

To succeed, the higher ed community needs to:

move integrity to the very center of learning;

educate, not indict;

look forward, not back;

modernize, not moralize, because academic integrity is a challenge of collaborative engineering;

avoid cat-and-mouse or tech-on-tech strategies that fail on day one;

respect diverse views; and to

institutionalize new responsibilities in a way that accounts for the natural impermanence of a student body.

The antidotes to fear and risk are courage and a good — flexible and collaborative — plan. As for the institutional habits holding everyone back, the solution is to act boldly. Now. Because all heck is going to break loose just as these future leaders graduate and begin to navigate the insecurities and challenges to justice, critical thought and democratic governance that AI is bound to bring.

With any luck, those alumni will be designing policies and safeguards to protect us from bad actors wielding AI against all of us. Let’s make sure they’re prepared.

Will this be some kind of panacea? Of course not.

But when it comes to defending authentic learning in the AI era, the successful campaigns will be those deploying the foot soldiers and brain trust already there in the classroom.