Cheers to '42 Brew: Elicit Brewing Company Debuts New Alumni-Inspired Beer

The alumni-owned brew pub has partnered with Fairfield to create ’42 Brew, a new lager that will be served at Alumni Family Weekend, Oct. 18-20.

Fairfield University is thrilled to announce an exciting new collaboration with Elicit Brewing Company: '42 Brew, a new craft beer that celebrates the University’s enduring legacy and alumni community. Founded in 1942, Fairfield University has a rich history rooted in Jesuit values, academic excellence, and school spirit. The special lager will debut on campus during Alumni Family Weekend, Oct. 18-20, 2024.

Available at Elicit Brewing Company's newest Connecticut location in the Black Rock section of Fairfield, '42 Brew is the perfect way for local and visiting Fairfield alumni to toast to camaraderie and connection in Stag Country. The craft beer will be sold at sporting events on campus this year and will soon be available for purchase at Harry’s Wine & Liquor Shop in Fairfield, Conn.

Fairfield’s partnership with Elicit highlights the remarkable journey of two brothers, both proud Fairfield alumni, who are making a splash in the local craft brew industry. Steve Ciardiello ’80 and Peter Ciardiello ’81 credit their Fairfield education with igniting their entrepreneurial passion for business and community. After decades-long careers in law, insurance, and the restaurant business, Elicit Brewing Company is their latest adventure. Building upon the success of their original Manchester, Conn., location, the brothers’ vision for the new Elicit brew pub in Fairfield is clear: to be a gathering place for families, friends, and fellow alumni.

“At Fairfield University, we are dedicated to fostering meaningful connections with our local business community and our alumni. The launch of '42 Brew in partnership with Elicit Brewing Company is a testament to that commitment, and to the innovative spirit of our alumni,” said Jennifer Anderson ’97, MBA’02, vice president of Marketing and Communications.

Reflecting on the influence of their Fairfield University education, Steve Ciardiello said, “I developed a tremendous appreciation for the Jesuit core curriculum...We had a broader base knowledge of a lot of different subjects.” A pre-med major, he noted that his Fairfield education developed his analytical skills and fostered a willingness to listen, analyze, and evaluate situations.

“Fairfield taught me a lot about structure, and motivation... My schedule was very tight and time management was very important. I think that helped me immensely in my professional career,” said Peter Ciardiello, who majored in business and played baseball at Fairfield.

The Ciardiellos and their business partners: a brother, Richard; sister, Paula; childhood friend, Rich; and Ellis Reilly—searched for a location to open an Elicit Brewing Company in Fairfield for a decade and a half. They are thankful that it has finally become a reality and are enjoying the opportunity to connect with fellow alumni in their new space, located at 111 Black Rock Tpke.

The partnership between Elicit Brewing Company and Fairfield University was facilitated by the University’s third-party sponsorship agency, Van Wagner Sports and Entertainment, which also played a key role in facilitating the University’s partnership with Silvermine Coffee Roasters, and the recent launch of Red Sea Coffee.

Learn more at fairfieldstags.com/feature/42Brew.