Latest U.S. News Undergraduate Rankings Build on Fairfield's Enrollment Success
U.S. News & World Report's 2025 Best Colleges Rankings place Fairfield 7th nationally among all national Doctoral/Professional Universities (DPU), as classified by the Carnegie classification system.

Our continued rise among national universities is a direct result of our expanding programs, increased student success, and strategic investments in faculty and resources.

— President Mark R. Nemec, PhD

Fairfield University continues to solidify its position as a leading academic institution, earning notable placements in the 2025 edition of U.S. News & World Report’s Best Colleges Rankings. This news comes as the University welcomes its Class of 2028, a cohort chosen from among a record-breaking pool of 18,505 applicants. The most academically competitive class to be admitted in the University’s history, these first-years boast an average weighted GPA of 3.96.

Fairfield’s academic selectivity has driven our acceptance rate down to an unprecedented 33 percent, a significant decrease from the previous year.

"These rankings reflect the tremendous progress we’ve made this year, underscoring Fairfield’s dedication to academic excellence and innovation. Our continued rise among national universities is a direct result of our expanding programs, increased student success, and strategic investments in faculty and resources,” said President Mark R. Nemec, PhD. “We are poised for even greater acceleration in the coming years, as we remain focused on delivering a transformative educational experience that prepares our students to thrive in a rapidly evolving world."

U.S. News & World Report’s rankings assess nearly 1,500 national colleges and universities based on up to 17 academic quality measures, with a focus on social mobility and post-graduation outcomes.

Among 442 institutions in the National Universities category, Fairfield University is ranked No. 132 overall, and earned recognition in several specialty categories, reflecting the University’s dedication to academic excellence and student success. Out of 161 national Doctoral/Professional Universities (DPU), as classified by the Carnegie classification system, Fairfield is No. 7.

Key Rankings for Fairfield University
National Universities: No. 132
Undergraduate Teaching - National Universities: No. 45 (T)
Best Undergraduate Business: No.127(T)
Best Undergraduate Engineering - Non-Doctorate: No. 78 (T)
Best Undergraduate Nursing: No. 96 (T)
Best Undergraduate Psychology: No. 201 (T)
Fairfield’s performance places it among the top universities in Connecticut, after only Yale University and the University of Connecticut. Fairfield remained in the top 45 out of 97 nationally ranked universities in the Northeast.

Fairfield University's Dolan School of Business continues to shine in specialized areas, with standout rankings in key business disciplines:

Accounting: No. 18 (T)
Finance: No. 16 (T)
Marketing: No. 16 (T)
Management: No. 38 (T)
Business Analytics: No. 13 (T)
Fairfield’s strong showing in these programs highlights the University's commitment to delivering a top-tier business education that equips students with the skills and knowledge to thrive in their respective industries.

Additional Specialty Rankings
Best Value Schools - National Universities: No. 131
Best Colleges for Veterans - National Universities: No. 89 (T)
For more on Fairfield University’s rankings, visit fairfield.edu/rankings.