MLB announces sports betting suspensions for 5 players
Marcano on permanently ineligible list; 4 others receive 1-year suspensions
June 4th, 2024
Mark Feinsand

Major League Baseball placed Padres infielder/outfielder Tucupita Marcano on the permanently ineligible list Tuesday for violating the league’s sports betting rules and policies. Four other players received one-year suspensions for other gambling-related violations.

Athletics right-handed pitcher Michael Kelly received a one-year suspension, as did Minor Leaguers Jay Groome (Padres left-handed pitcher), José Rodríguez (Phillies infielder) and Andrew Saalfrank (D-backs left-handed pitcher). The five players were disciplined for unrelated violations of the league’s gambling policy following investigations by MLB’s Department of Investigations.

Under Major League Rule 21, “Any player, umpire or club or league official or employee, who shall bet any sum whatsoever upon any baseball game in connection with which the bettor has a duty to perform, shall be declared permanently ineligible.” The rule also states that betting on any baseball game “in connection with which the bettor has no duty to perform, shall be declared ineligible for one year.”

None of the five players played in any game on which they placed a bet, the league said, and all denied having any inside information relevant to the bets.

According to MLB, the betting data does not suggest that any outcomes in the games bet on by these players were compromised, influenced or manipulated in any way.

“The strict enforcement of Major League Baseball’s rules and policies governing gambling conduct is a critical component of upholding our most important priority: protecting the integrity of our games for the fans,” Commissioner Rob Manfred said. “The longstanding prohibition against betting on Major League Baseball games by those in the sport has been a bedrock principle for over a century. We have been clear that the privilege of playing in baseball comes with a responsibility to refrain from engaging in certain types of behavior that are legal for other people.


“Since the Supreme Court decision opened the door to legalized sports betting, we have worked with licensed sports betting operators and other third parties to put ourselves in a better position from an integrity perspective through the transparency that a regulated sports betting system can provide. MLB will continue to invest heavily in integrity monitoring, educational programming and awareness initiatives with the goal of ensuring strict adherence to this fundamental rule of our game.”

None of the players are appealing their discipline.

The league’s investigations included interviews, thorough review of the available information in each matter and significant cooperation from MLB’s legal sportsbook partners.

In March 2024, a legal sports betting operator made MLB aware that it had identified past baseball betting activity from accounts connected to multiple Major and Minor League players. MLB obtained data from that operator and other sportsbooks, including authentication data for bets.

Betting data shows that from 2022-23, Marcano placed 387 baseball bets, including 231 MLB-related bets, through a legal sportsbook. Marcano’s MLB bets were generally parlays. Some included multiple MLB-related legs. Others included both MLB-related legs and non-MLB legs.

In total, Marcano bet more than $150,000 on baseball, with $87,319 of that on MLB-related bets. Of the MLB bets Marcano placed over this period, 25 of those bets included Pirates games while he was a member of Pittsburgh’s Major League club. Marcano did not appear in any of the games on which he placed bets, however, as he was on the injured list after suffering a season-ending knee injury last July 24.

Marcano played parts of three big league seasons (2021-23) with the Padres and Pirates, posting a .217/.269/.320 slash line with five home runs. He hasn’t appeared in an MLB game since his ACL injury last July. He was claimed off waivers by the Padres last November.

The Pirates issued the following statement following MLB's announcement: “We are extremely disappointed in Tucupita’s actions and are fully supportive of Major League Baseball’s ruling. The Pirates, along with MLB, the Players Association, and every Club, work to ensure all involved within our game are aware of the rules and policies around gambling. While the thorough investigation revealed no evidence of any games being compromised, influenced, or manipulated in any way in this case, protecting the integrity of our game is paramount."